3. Creating a manifest file

In the third step, we will create a manifest.json file for our extension. This file is a required part of every Chrome extension and serves as a configuration file for the extension. It contains information about the extension, such as its name, description, version, icons, and permissions.

To create the manifest.json file, create a new file in the project directory and name it manifest.json. Then, add the following code to the file:
{
    "manifest_version": 3,
    "name": "Color Picker",
    "description": "A simple color picker extension. Easily pick any color on the screen, view a history of picked colors, and copy or clear them with a single click.",
    "version": "1.0",
    "action": {
        "default_popup": "index.html"
    },
    "icons": {
        "16": "icons/icon16.png",
        "32": "icons/icon32.png",
        "48": "icons/icon48.png",
        "128": "icons/icon128.png"
    }
}

You can download a set of icons for the color picker extension from this Google Drive link. Once downloaded, change the folder name to  icons and add it to the project directory of your extension.
4. Testing and Debugging

In the fourth step, we’ll load our extension into Chrome from our local directory for testing and debugging purposes. To do this, follow these steps:

    Open Chrome and go to this URL: chrome://extensions.
    Enable the “Developer mode” toggle in the top-right corner of the page.
    Click the “Load unpacked” button and select your extension project directory.
    Your extension should now be loaded and appeared on the Chrome extensions page.

Testing and Debugging the Extension

To test the extension, click the extension icon in the Chrome toolbar and make sure that the color picker’s UI appears as expected and functionality works correctly.

If you encounter any issues or errors, you can use the Chrome DevTools console to debug the extension. To open DevTools, right-click on the extension popup and select “Inspect” option. You’ll also see Errors button right after the remove button for your extension.

Before publishing your extension to the Chrome Web Store or making it publicly available, it is essential to thoroughly test and debug it to ensure that it is functioning correctly.
5. Publishing the extension

In the final step, we will publish our color picker extension to the Chrome Web Store so that it can available to all users of Chrome. To do this, follow these steps:

    Create a zip file of your extension and go to the Chrome Developer Dashboard.
    Click the “Add new item” button and select the “Extension” option.
    Fill out the required fields, including the name, description, and categories for your extension.
    Upload the manifest.json file and the required icons for the extension.
    Submit the extension for review.

Publishing your extension to the Chrome Web Store is a great way to showcase your skills as a developer and share your work with a wide audience. If you encounter any issues or problems during the publishing process, you can refer to the official documentation from Google for guidance.
Conclusion and Final Words

By following the steps in this blog, you’ve successfully created a functional color picker extension that allows users to easily select colors from the screen. This extension is compatible with all Chromium-based web browsers, including Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Opera, etc.

This project was a great opportunity to practice your web development skills and learn more about how Chrome extensions work. We hope that you enjoyed the process and feel more confident in your ability to create extensions in the future.

If you found this blog helpful, please consider sharing it with others. Your support helps us continue creating valuable content and resources for the development community. Thank you for your support!